According to a study published in The Journal of Clinical Investigation on May 25, researchers propose that it is brought on when viral particles in the gut of these patients make their way into the blood. They found that weeks after an initial SARS-CoV-2 infection, kids had viral RNA in their stool and antigens in their blood along with markers of a leaky gut, suggesting that the trafficking of antigens—specifically, the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein—from the gut to the bloodstream might be driving MIS-C. Although doctors have looked, they hadn’t detected the virus in the blood of kids with MIS-C, a rare and severe hyperinflammatory condition that is responsible for 35 children’s deaths in the US. They found significantly higher levels of viral antigens in the blood of MIS-C patients than in the rest of the kids. Given her various concerns, Rowley says that these results “would need to be confirmed by a totally independent group of investigators before I would feel confident that this explains MIS-C.” Brodin notes that it is not yet possible to state that a leaky gut is driving MIS-C. “There are many conditions associated with increased gut permeability,” and these analyses cannot tell “whether this is a cause or a consequence of the disease.”

Blocking zonulin as a potential treatment for MIS-C.
Encouraged by their findings, Yonker and her colleagues asked the US Food and Drug Administration for compassionate use of larazotide, a zonulin antagonist, in a 17-month-old MIS-C patient with a complex medical history. Alessio Fasano, a pediatric gastroenterologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and a coauthor of the study, says that this achievement, derived from stopping the leakage of antigens from the gut into the bloodstream, is an indication that the leaky gut is a cause and not a consequence of MIS-C. Fasano, who discovered zonulin in 2000, is a cofounder of Alba Therapeutics, a company that was in charge of earlier clinical trials to test larazotide for celiac disease.