The team was led by biomedical engineer James Collins, who is also cofounder and director of Sherlock Biosciences, a firm built around the CRISPR-based diagnostic tool called SHERLOCK which the platform employs (hence miSHERLOCK: its short for minimally instrumented SHERLOCK). However, those tests still require external steps and lab equipment for sample processing, while a miSHERLOCK test runs from start to finish within the self-contained device. Prepping raw samples for nucleic acid analysis takes several steps, including breaking open cells and viral particles to access the nucleic acids, stripping the sample of proteins and other cellular components that could interfere with the reactionall while being careful to not degrade the nucleic acids; single-stranded RNA is particularly sensitive to degradation. Boston Childrens Hospital infectious disease specialist and study coauthor Rose Lee says the motivation of the miSHERLOCK project was to create a testing platform that would work in resource-limited settings, including clinics with limited access to lab equipment and trained lab technicians, or even within ones own home. Then, the user transfers the column to the second 3-D printed chamber (that runs at 37 C) and pushes a plunger, plopping the membrane into a new tube and releasing water to activate the freeze-dried one-pot SHERLOCK reaction. By the end of the reaction in a miSHERLOCK device, LED lights inside the reaction chamber shine on the sample, making positive tests glow brightly. Saliva is a complex mixture, says Tan, full of enzymes that will basically kill off any reactionor cause excessive false positives because, like the CRISPR enzyme in the test, salivary nucleases can chomp through the assays reporter probe. The researchers say their goal is to make the entire testing platform cheap and easy enough for anyone to assemble from start to finishand to eliminate steps that normally require equipment such as pipettes or thermal cyclers, but miSHERLOCK isnt ready to be rolled out to home-bound patients or remote clinicians yet. They had to make do with what they had, which is why their specificity tests were run on commercially available (but not otherwise infected) saliva samples that were spiked with different variants, and didnt include tests on the now-dominant Delta variant. Najjar notes that Delta simply wasnt a variant of concern when they were developing the platform a few months ago, but adds that the speed with which Delta has spread is a testament for the need for flexible testing platforms like miSHERLOCK.