In this study, we provide evidence that GI sources of SARS-CoV-2 viral antigenemia may instigate and drive MIS-C. We demonstrate that weeks after the initial infection, SARS-CoV-2 RNA remains in the GI tract, and zonulin-instigated hyperpermeability of the mucosal barrier coincides with SARS-CoV-2 antigenemia. Results

This study included biospecimens from 100 children: 19 children were clinically diagnosed with MIS-C as defined by CDC criteria (Supplemental Table 1; supplemental material available online with this article; https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI149633DS1); 26 children had COVID-19 confirmed by RT-PCR; and 55 children served as non–COVID-19 controls (32 pre-pandemic). In this study, mass spectrometry showed that, compared with controls, children with MIS-C had significantly increased release of zonulin into the circulation (P = 0.003; Figure 2A), which can result in a breakdown of mucosal barrier function. We attribute circulating antigen in patients with MIS-C to leakage from the GI system, as corroborated by the increased zonulin levels and microbial translocation markers we detected in the patients with MIS-C. Consistent with hyperinflammatory responses, children with MIS-C experienced a cytokine storm with significantly elevated levels of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-α (Supplemental Figure 3, A–D). The immunoglobulin IgM, IgG, and IgA subsets targeting SARS-CoV-2 antigens in patients with MIS-C were most highly elevated against spike and S1 proteins (Figure 3, A–C, and Supplemental Figure 4), corresponding to the antigens most highly detected in the bloodstream of these children. As expected, anti–spike IgG, anti–S1 IgG, and anti–RBD IgG were highest in the children with delayed-­onset MIS-C (Figure 3B and Supplemental Figure 4) and remained plateaued over time (Figure 3E). Here, the levels of anti–spike IgA, anti–S1 IgA, and anti–RBD IgA were all significantly increased in the patients with MIS-C (Figure 3C and Supplemental Figure 4), and anti–spike IgA remained unexpectedly elevated for months after the initial SARS-CoV-2 infection (Figure 3F). The persistence of elevated anti–SARS-CoV-2 IgA and IgM in patients with MIS-C supports the hypothesis of ongoing viral antigenic exposure and inflammation in the GI mucosal surfaces of children with MIS-C. We compared the capacity of plasma neutralization against SARS-CoV-2 between children with MIS-C and those with acute COVID-19. Interestingly, although the children with MIS-C had significantly elevated IgG antibody titers against SARS-CoV-2 relative to those with acute COVID-19, the neutralization titers were comparable between the children from both groups (Figure 3G). Ineffective neutralization and poor antigen clearance, combined with ongoing viral antigen leakage from GI sources, could partially explain the high levels of antigen detected in the children with MIS-C.
Temporal kinetics reveal that SARS-CoV-2 antigenemia is inadequately contained by humoral responses in MIS-C. Antigenemia in adults occurs early in the COVID-19 disease course and is associated with pulmonary symptoms (25), whereas in MIS-C, antigenemia is found in the setting of prominent GI symptoms weeks to months after resolution of a SARS-CoV-2 upper respiratory tract infection or asymptomatic infection. One month after he was diagnosed with COVID-19, he developed abdominal compartment syndrome with a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 286 mg/L, a ferritin level of 51,223 μg/L, and a N-terminal pro-b–type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level of 16,462 pg/mL without evidence of cardiac injury on echocardiogram. We detected 1020 copies of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the patient’s stool, as quantified by RT-PCR, and a plasma spike antigen level of 566 pg/mL more than 2 weeks after initiation of IVIG and steroid treatment for MIS-C. After the initiation of larazotide, his CRP level, which had quickly rebounded to 173 mg/L following withdrawal of anakinra, dropped by 85% from peak values, and spike antigen levels dropped by 90% to 59 pg/mL (Figure 5A). The data provided here represent the first evidence to our knowledge of prolonged exposure to SARS-CoV-2 in the GI tract of children with MIS-C coinciding with zonulin release, indicating a loss of mucosal barrier integrity, and SARS-CoV-2 antigenemia, which may be driving the hyperinflammatory responses defining MIS-C (Figure 6). In our cohort of patients with MIS-C, the majority of stool samples from children with MIS-C contained SARS-CoV-2 RNA, and most MIS-C patients presented with unusually severe GI symptoms, abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, in addition to severe myocardial dysfunction and cardiac shock. Although extensive tissue studies are necessary to provide direct evidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the GI tract, these data, in addition to the predominance of severe GI symptoms in patients with MIS-C, point to a viral or viral antigenic source that originates from the GI system at the time of MIS-C presentation. This suggests that the intestinal leakage of the SARS-CoV-2 antigens themselves is responsible for triggering the profound cytokine release and hyperinflammatory response seen in MIS-C. As zonulin-dependent loss of gut integrity develops in MIS-C– but not COVID-19–infected children, this suggests that a chronicity of SARS-CoV-2 dysbiosis in the gut results in a cumulative increase in the breakdown of mucosal barrier integrity. Importantly, antigen levels persist for days to weeks after hospitalization and treatment for MIS-C in some cases, revealing that current treatments (i.e., steroids and/or IVIG) target inflammatory responses but may not adequately mitigate intestinal permeability and SARS-CoV-2 antigen leakage into the blood. These data suggest that in MIS-C, the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in the GI tract may lead to local mucosal inflammation, increased zonulin release, and a subsequent increase in gut permeability allowing SARS-CoV-2 antigens, including the superantigen-like motif of the spike protein, to traffic across mucosal barriers and into the bloodstream.