Among COVID-19 patients admitted to UK hospitals in Spring 2020, the case fatality rate was over 26%, and was in excess of 37% in patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation. Hypoxic respiratory failure in patients with COVID-19 is associated with evidence of systemic inflammation, including release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6 and TNFα, and elevated levels of D-dimers, ferritin, and C-reactive protein (CRP).3,4 The host immune response is thought to play a key role in driving an acute inflammatory pneumonic process with diffuse alveolar damage, myeloid cell infiltrates, and microvascular thrombosis.5 The beneficial effects of dexamethasone and other corticosteroids in COVID-19 patients with hypoxic lung damage suggest that other, more specific immunomodulatory agents may provide additional improvements in clinical outcomes.6,7 Tocilizumab is a recombinant humanised anti-IL-6 receptor monoclonal antibody that inhibits the binding of IL-6 to both membrane and soluble IL-6 receptors, blocking IL-6 signalling and reducing inflammation. Randomised trials of tocilizumab in COVID-19 have so far shown mixed results for 28-day mortality: six small trials reported no benefit while the somewhat larger REMAP-CAP trial reported a benefit in patients requiring organ support.8-14 Here we report the results of a large randomised controlled trial of tocilizumab in adult patients hospitalised with severe COVID-19 characterised by hypoxia and significant inflammation. METHODS

Study design and participants

The Randomised Evaluation of COVID-19 therapy (RECOVERY) trial is an investigator-initiated, individually randomised, controlled, open-label, platform trial to evaluate the effects of potential treatments in patients hospitalised with COVID-19. All eligible and consenting patients received usual standard of care and underwent an initial (main) randomisation comprising up to 3 parts in a factorial design (appendix p 29): part 1, no additional treatment azithromycin, or colchicine; part 2, no additional treatment vs. either convalescent plasma or REGN-COV2 (a combination of two monoclonal antibodies directed against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein); and part 3, no additional treatment vs. aspirin. Up to 21 days after the main randomisation and regardless of treatment allocation, RECOVERY trial participants with clinical evidence of progressive COVID-19 (defined as
oxygen saturation <92% on room air or receiving oxygen therapy, and CRP ≥75 mg/L) could be considered for randomisation to tocilizumab vs. usual care alone. Patients who were eligible for randomisation to tocilizumab were assigned to either usual standard of care or usual standard of care plus tocilizumab in a 1:1 ratio using web-based simple (unstratified) randomisation with allocation concealed until after randomisation. For the pre-specified composite secondary outcome of invasive mechanical ventilation or death within 28 days (among those not receiving invasive mechanical ventilation at randomisation) and the subsidiary clinical outcomes of receipt of ventilation and receipt of haemodialysis or haemofiltration, the precise dates were not available and so the risk ratio was estimated instead. Prior to commencement of the randomisation to tocilizumab vs. usual care, the trial steering committee determined that if 28-day mortality in the usual care group was above 25% then recruitment of around 4000 patients to this comparison would provide 90% power at two-sided P=0.01 to detect a proportional reduction in 28-day mortality of one-fifth. RESULTS

Between 14 April 2020 and 24 January 2021, 4116 (19%) of 21550 patients enrolled into the RECOVERY trial at one of the 131 sites in the UK participating in the tocilizumab comparison were eligible for randomisation. At randomisation, 562 (14%) patients were receiving invasive mechanical ventilation, 1686 (41%) were receiving non-invasive respiratory support (including high-flow nasal oxygen, continuous positive airway pressure, and non-invasive ventilation), and 1868 (45%) were receiving no respiratory support other than simple oxygen therapy (9 of these patients were reportedly not receiving oxygen at randomisation) (table 1). 82% of patients were reported to be receiving corticosteroids at randomisation (and 97% of the patients enrolled since the announcement of the dexamethasone result from RECOVERY in June 2021). The follow-up form was completed for 1602 (79%) of 2022 randomised patients in the tocilizumab group and 1664 (79%) of 2094 patients in the usual care group. Allocation to tocilizumab was associated with a significant reduction in the primary outcome of 28-day mortality compared with usual care alone (596 [29%] of 2022 patients in the tocilizumab group vs. 694 (33%) of 2094 patients in the usual care group; rate ratio 0·86; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0·77 to 0·96; p=0·007; figure 2a). DISCUSSION

The results of this large, randomised trial indicate that tocilizumab is an effective treatment for hospitalised COVID-19 patients who have hypoxia and evidence of inflammation (CRP ≥75 mg/L). These include six small trials (fewer than 100 deaths in each) and the somewhat larger REMAP-CAP trial, which recruited critically ill patients with COVID-19, over 99% of whom required non-invasive respiratory support or invasive mechanical ventilation.8-14 Taken together, these previous trials did not show a significant mortality benefit for treatment with tocilizumab (death rate ratio 0·91, 95% CI 0·72-1·14, figure 4). These benefits are in addition to those previously reported for corticosteroids, which is now usual standard of care for COVID-19 patients requiring treatment with oxygen.6,18 Our data suggest that in COVID-19 patients who are hypoxic and have evidence of systematic inflammation, treatment with a combination of a systemic corticosteroid plus tocilizumab would be expected to reduce mortality by about one-third for patients receiving simple oxygen and nearly one-half for those receiving invasive mechanical ventilation. Previous trials have provided weak evidence that tocilizumab may shorten time to discharge or reduce progression to invasive mechanical ventilation or death.10,14 Our results show that in a broad spectrum of patients, tocilizumab increases the chances of being discharged alive within 28 days and reduces the chance of progression to receiving invasive mechanical ventilation. For example the US National Institutes for Health conclusion is that there are insufficient data to recommend either for or against the use of tocilizumab or sarilumab, a view shared by some commentators.19,20 By contrast, interim guidance in the NHS states that IL-6 antagonists should be considered for patients within 24 hours of starting non-invasive respiratory support or invasive mechanical ventilation.21 Our results show that the benefits of tocilizumab extend to a broader group of patients receiving oxygen with or without other forms of respiratory support, and that those benefits include a reduction in the need for invasive mechanical ventilation and other organ support such as renal replacement therapy. The RECOVERY trial has demonstrated that for patients hospitalized with severe COVID, treatment with tocilizumab reduces mortality, increases the chances of successful hospital discharge, and reduces the chances of requiring invasive mechanical ventilation.