Seroconversion rates following COVID-19 vaccination among patients with cancer

INTRODUCTION
COVID-19 can result in increased morbidity and mortality in patients with cancer (Kuderer et al., 2020; Mehta et al., 2020; Bakouny et al., 2020), suggesting the need for prophylactic strategies in this immunosuppressed population. Follow-up studies on seroconversion in cancer patients with COVID-19 demonstrated that while most will develop antibody response similar to the general population, subgroups of cancer patients with hematologic malignancies, receiving anti-CD20 antibody therapies and stem cell transplantation, exhibit lower rates of seroconversion (Thakkar et al., 2021; Marra et al., 2020). These results suggested that overall high seroconversion rates might be anticipated in patients with malignancies following COVID-19 vaccinations as well, with likely reduced immunogenicity in certain subgroups of patients manifesting from different degrees and mechanisms of immune suppression. Given the higher morbidity and mortality of patients with cancer and COVID-19, their ongoing need to be exposed to the healthcare system, and their frequent need for immunosuppressive therapies, patients with cancer have been identified as a high-priority subgroup for COVID-19 vaccinations, an effort supported by multiple key organizations (Ribas et al., 2021; Van Der Veldt et al., 2021; Desai et al., 2021). Ultimately based on study criteria, 233 patients were evaluable for vaccine safety analysis and 200 patients were evaluable for vaccine efficacy analysis. To narrow this key knowledge gap, we conducted this study to comprehensively determine the immunogenicity of vaccines in a cohort of patients with a diagnosis of a malignancy in New York City via evaluation of rates of anti-spike immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody positivity following vaccination with one of the three Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved COVID-19 vaccines. Twenty-six de-identified patients without a cancer diagnosis who had completed COVID-19 vaccination and received a SARS-CoV-2 IgG spike antibody test >7 days after their most recent vaccine dose were used as a control cohort (Table S1). One hundred and fifty patients (75%) had an active malignancy and 135 patients (67%) were in active cancer therapy at the time of their vaccination, with 112 (56%) patients on active chemotherapy. In the safety analysis, 139 patients had received BNT162b2 first dose, 131 patients BNT162b2 second dose, 71 patients mRNA-1273 first dose, 64 patients mRNA-1273 second dose, and 23 patients the single-dose Ad26.COV2S vaccine. Solid tumors versus hematologic malignancies
In the cohort of patients with solid tumors, seropositivity post vaccination was high (98%), while a significantly lower seropositivity rate was seen in patients with hematologic malignancies (85%, p = 0.001, Fisher’s exact test). We observed significantly lower seroconversion rates in patients who underwent these therapies: stem cell transplant (73%, p = 0.0002, Fisher’s exact test), antiCD20 therapies (70%, p = 0.0001, Fisher’s exact test) and CAR-T cell treatments (all three patients remained seronegative after vaccination, p = 0.0002, Fisher’s exact test) (Table 3). Treatment within 48 h of a vaccine dose 
We collected data to evaluate whether patients who received active cancer therapies 48 h before or after a vaccine dose had lesser seropositivity rates. We observed that three patients were seronegative, and there was no statistically significant association regarding whether patients received cancer therapies within 48 h of the vaccine or not (p = 0.7, Fisher’s exact test). Our cohort included 22 patients with cancer who had known prior COVID-19, and a high rate of seroconversion was seen in this subset (21/22 seroconverted for a 95% seroconversion rate with one patient not seroconverting having received an autologous stem cell transplant). Various factors adversely affect outcomes in cancer patients affected with COVID-19, including impact of underlying disease on performance status, age/comorbidities of affected patients, immune suppression related to disease such as in patients with hematologic malignancies, and immune-suppressive effects of disease-directed therapies (Lee et al., 2020a, 2020b; Jee et al., 2020; Garcı́a-Suárez et al., 2020; Mehta et al., 2020; Westblade et al., 2020). These early studies clearly highlight the need to complete full vaccination schedules for optimum seroconversion and also emphasize the need for larger cohort studies to determine the immunogenicity of COVID-19 vaccines among patients receiving distinct cancer therapeutics. On the other hand, our study highlights at-risk cohorts of patients, in particular patients with hematologic malignancies following receipt of immunosuppressive therapies such as stem cell transplantation, anti-CD20 therapies, and CAR-T cell treatments. In addition, higher doses or booster doses of some vaccines or vaccinations of mixed vaccine types might offer stronger immunogenicity and need to be explored in immunosuppressed patients. In this cohort of ethnically diverse patients with broad representation of a wide range of malignancies and therapies, very high seropositivity rates were observed, in contrast to previously published smaller cohort studies focusing on unique subsets of susceptible patients or non-standard vaccination schedules. Statistically significantly lower seropositivity rates were observed in patients with hematologic malignancies and patients having received immunosuppressive therapies.