There are currently three accepted methods for the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection: 1) Viral RNA detection; 2) Viral protein detec­tion, typically against the nucleocapsid (N) protein or spike (S) surface glycoprotein; and 3) Measurement of specific antibodies directed to­wards viral proteins. While sensitivity and specificity approach 99% in ideal settings, reported real-world sensitivities are estimated to be as low as 70% (Arevalo-Rodriguez et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020), likely due to variation in sample collection methods and differences in viral shedding across the oropharynx and respiratory tract (Afzal, 2020). 1, where aptamers directed at the viral S or N protein are pre-conjugated to invertase through a small antisense oligonucleotide strand complementary to a portion of the aptamer’s binding domain (aptatope). Biotin-tagged, HPLC-grade purified aptamers against SARS-CoV-2 N (Chen et al., 2020) and S (Song et al., 2020) antigen and complementary thiolated antisense DNA oligonucleotides were designed and ordered from Integrated DNA Technology (IDT). The MBs were then equili­brated with DPBS buffer for 10 min, the incubation buffer discarded and resuspended in 200 μL of the biotinylated aptamer/antisense-invertase complex. 100 μL of DPBS buffer spiked with SARS-CoV-2 N or S protein was incubated with 200 μg of MBC (N or S) with gentle shaking for 30 min at RT in a 1.5 mL centrifuge tube. 90 μL of the supernatant was transferred to another centrifuge tube prefilled with 100 μL of 2× Measurement buffer (Supplemental Table S2). The 5′ end of the aptamers and antisense strands were extended with a linker (6 and 12 thymine oligomers, respectively) to increase the distance between the aptamer and the magnetic beads, allowing the aptamer room to properly fold and reduce steric hindrance. To test the release of the antisense strand from the aptamer upon ligand binding, we designed a PCR-based assay where protein binding induces a conformation change in the aptamer, releasing the antisense oligo, as shown in Supplemental Fig. A calibration plot was generated by varying the antigen concentration across the same range as commercially available SARS-CoV-2 ELISA kits (”2019-nCoV Coronavirus Nucleocapsid ELISA Kit, KIT40588 | Sino Biological,” n. d.; “2019-nCoV Coronavirus spike ELISA Kit, KIT40592 | Sino Biological,” n. d.). The LODs in buffer were 1.50 pM and 1.31 pM for protein N and S, respectively. In saliva, the LODs increased to 5.27 pM and 6.31 pM for protein N and S, respec­tively. The custom electrochemical sensor performed similarly but achieved lower LODs (0.71 pM and 0.34 pM for protein N and S, respectively) due to the use of a high-performance, benchtop potentiostat. Protein N and S specific aptamer complexes were assayed with the off-target antigens at a fixed concentration of 500pM with the conditions described above. Unsurprisingly, the SARS-CoV-2 N aptamer displayed the highest signal with the MERS nucleocapsid antigen and the S aptamer with the MERS-CoV RBD antigen, consistent with reported homology between the two coronavirus genomes. Previous studies of protein S and N directed aptamers validated binding with only recombinant purified proteins (Chen et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). S9, demonstrate the ability of both assays to correctly differentiate between infected and non-infected individuals; however, the protein S assay showed significantly higher signal-to-control than the protein N assay and was selected as the focus of the larger study. Saliva is the most readily obtained human specimen; however, it is also a complex and viscous sample consisting of various electrolytes, enzymes, and antibodies (Chauncey et al., 1954;Jasim et al., 2016) posing hurdles for specific and interference-free biomarker detection (Paltiel et al., 2020). These tests confirmed that findings determined using free antigen in buffer and saliva could be replicated with native antigens, setting the stage for clinical testing. Since our test consists of readily available reagents and low-cost glucose test strips, each test has a modest $3.20 USD production cost with the current low volume production (see Supplemental Table 2).