Pinning geometries throughout the device direct sample fluids towards enclosed hydrophilic paper networks allowing for reaction rehydration (Fig. We found that a ×1.5-concentrated cell-free reaction increased the reaction kinetics to enable signal output at least 10 min faster, ensuring that the desired circuit is completed before eventual evaporation in the device terminates the reaction (Extended Data Fig. The toehold sensor enabled detection of Ebola virus RNA at a concentration of 300 nM at 30 min compared with a control sample containing no target (unpaired t-test of independent reaction chambers; deconvoluted green channel P = 0.0074) (Fig. The riboswitch circuit was able to detect its target molecule, theophylline, at a concentration of 1 mM at 35 min compared with a control sample (unpaired t-test of independent reaction chambers; deconvoluted green channel P = 0.005) (Fig. All of the colorimetric wFDCF sensors reported here exhibited visible changes within ~40–60 min after exposure to the respective trigger molecules or inducer, and were performed at ambient conditions of 30–40% relative humidity and 30 °C to simulate the average skin surface temperature15. This fabric was chosen as our main immobilization substrate after conducting a compatibility screening of over 100 fabrics (for example, silks, cotton, rayon, linen, hemp, bamboo, wool, polyester, polyamide, nylon and combination materials) using a lyophilized constitutive lacZ cell-free reaction (Supplementary Figs. To achieve this, we modified our POF platform optics for excitation and detection at near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence, generated from a lyophilized acetylcholinesterase (AChE)-choline oxidase-HRP-coupled enzyme reaction (Fig. The fluorescent wFDCF platform allows for continuous monitoring of all reaction chambers through the fiber optic network at user-defined sampling intervals for the automated detection of rehydration events and fluorescent outputs from target-activated circuits. All reported wFDCF fluorescence and luminescence sensor replicates (n ≥ 3) exhibited visible fluorescence or luminescence within 5–20 min after exposure to relevant trigger conditions, at 30–40% relative humidity and 30 °C. The various optical fibers carrying the output emission signals from different sensors can be routed into a single bundle for centralized imaging analysis, which we demonstrate using a wFDCF CRISPR–Cas12a-based MRSA-sensing array, containing spa, ermA and mecA sensors, that was activated in the wearable prototype with a fluid splash containing 100 fM of spa DNA trigger (Extended Data Fig. In addition, the optical sensor allows for facile fluorescent output multiplexing simply by using fluorescent proteins with orthogonal emission profiles (Extended Data Fig. In this example, wFDCF reactions for three constitutively expressed fluorescent output proteins (eforRed26, dTomato27 and sfGFP28) were used to detect distinguishable output signals in a single bundle. Finally, to develop a complete data feedback cycle between the platform and the user, we integrated the detector system with a custom wireless mobile application that enables continuous cloud-based data logging, signal processing, geolocation tracking and on-the-fly control of various detector components through a smartphone or other networked digital device (Fig. Further details on the hardware and software design, as well as implementation of an Opuntia microdasys bioinspired fluid collection29 add-on for improved sample harvesting and routing splashes outside of the sensor zones into the wFDCF modules, can be found in Extended Data Fig. We designed a face-mask sensor containing four modular components: a reservoir for hydration, a large surface area collection sample pad, a wax-patterned µPAD (microfluidic paper-based analytical device) and a lateral flow assay (LFA) strip (Fig. Each reaction zone is separated by polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) time delays that enable tunable incubation times between each reaction, greatly improving the efficiency of the sensor compared with that of a one-pot lyophilized reaction (Supplementary Fig. The second µPAD reaction zone is a reverse transcription–recombinase polymerase amplification (RT-RPA) reaction zone containing a customized isothermal amplification reaction developed to target a nonoverlapping region of the SARS-CoV-2 S gene. From activation of the face-mask sensor to a final readout only takes ~1.5 h. The limit of detection observed for our sensors is 500 copies (17 aM) of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro transcribed (IVT) RNA, which matches that of World Health Organization-endorsed standard laboratory-based RT–PCR assays40 (Fig. Under these realistic simulation conditions, the face-mask sensor was able to detect a contrived SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA (vRNA) fragment after a breath sample collection period of 30 min, with a calculated accumulation of 106–107 vRNA copies on the sample pad, as determined by qPCR with reverse transcription (RT–qPCR) (Fig. In contrast to wearable sensors that primarily employ electronic devices to monitor physiological signals such as heart rate or blood oxygen levels, our sensors detect environmental threats or pathogens through nucleic acids, proteins or small molecules.