Finally, using whole genome sequencing linked to clinical annotations derived from electronic health records, we also identify deletion mutations in SARS-CoV-2 from COVID19 patients with infection/vaccine-breakthrough infections, also mapping near the antibodybinding site and thus representing candidates for vaccine escape mutations. To identify the mutations associated with surges in the community transmission of COVID-19 (“surge-associated mutations''), we shortlisted mutations that increased in prevalence monotonically during periods of monotonically increasing test positivity (Figure 1b). These surge-associated deletions in the Spike protein occur exclusively in the N-terminal domain, which is interesting in light of the recently identified recurrent deletion regions (RDRs) in the N-terminal domain15. In order to identify the mutations that are associated with these surges, we systematically analysed the mutations that increased monotonically in prevalence correlated with the monotonic increase in test positivity between February and April 2021 (Figure 2a and Figure 3a). Importantly, owing to the recent emergence of this deletion it had not been identified at the time of the prior characterization of Spike protein deletions 15, and thus we suggest that ΔF157/R158 represents a novel distinct fifth recurrent deletion region. Clustering these mutations by co-occurrences in sequences shows the emergence of a new variant characterized by a novel in-frame deletion resulting in the loss of residues 246253 and a D253G substitution (Δ246-253), which has increased 38.4 fold in prevalence from January to April 2020 (0.86% to 33.0%) (Figure 3b). Recurrent deletion regions in the Spike protein emerge and expand over the course of the pandemic In order to understand whether the deletable regions in the Spike protein are increasing, we examined the distribution of deletion frequencies for all amino acids in the Spike protein sequence from over 1.3 million sequences over the course of pandemic (Figure 4a,b; see Methods). Interestingly, these residues are part of the N-terminal region of the same antigenic supersite (Figure 4a), and mutations in this region (at C15 and L18) were common among neutralization escape mutants 13,14. Furthermore, this deletion region is emerging recently — most viral genomes containing one or more deletions in this region were deposited after October, 2020 15. For example, the Δ246-253 deletion in one of the surge associated Chile variants can be viewed as an expansion of the previously defined recurrent deletion region RDR4 (Δ242-248)15 (Figure 5b). Taken together, our analysis highlights both the emergence of novel deletion regions and the expansion of previously defined deletion regions over the past several months. Given the prominent ΔF157/R158 deletion in India, this corroborates our prior observation that recurrent deletion regions can expand and suggests that ΔF157/R158 may actually be part of a larger deletion prone region. More importantly, the possibility that this variant with a large contiguous deletion within the antigenic supersite was able to infect a fully vaccinated individual mandates further characterization of the potential immuno-evasive effects of deletions in this region. Specifically, we have identified deletions within the NTD antigenic supersite which are associated with vaccine breakthrough infections (e.g., Δ156-164), and we have identified other deletions in SARS-CoV-2 isolated from unvaccinated severe COVID19 patients that could represent emerging recurring deletion regions (e.g., Δ167-174). Here, through an integrated analysis of genomicepidemiology and clinical genomics, we found that (i) deletions are strongly associated with surges in community transmission (ii) deletions in the Spike protein NTD map to an antigenic supersite, (iii) the repertoire of deletions in the Spike protein is expanding over the course of the pandemic and (iv) deletions are present in a subset of vaccine breakthrough variants. In addition to deletion mutations, several substitution mutations are also associated with surges in cases (e.g. In addition to validating the previously suggested definitions of recurrent deletion regions RDR1 (ΔH69/V70 and flanking deletions), RDR2 (ΔY144 and flanking deletions), and RDR3 (ΔI210 and ΔN211), we found that RDR4 (previously defined as positions 242-248) has recently expanded to include positions 249253. After identifying the 89 surge-associated mutations, we tested whether any of the contributing mutation types (deletions, insertions, or substitutions) were enriched for surgeassociated mutations. Then, odds ratios and their corresponding 95% confidence intervals were calculated using the fisher.test function from the stats package (version 4.0.3) in R. Identification of new recurrent deletion regions in the Spike protein Recurrent deletion regions (RDRs) were previously defined as four sites within the NTD to which over 90% of all Spike protein deletions occurred, per the 146,795 SARS-CoV-2 sequences deposited in GISAID as of October 24, 2020. To assess the expansion of regions undergoing deletions over time, we plotted a time series heatmap indicating the first time (month) at which a given deletion was identified across all GISAID sequences, and the number of sequences in which that deletion was detected in that
month and all subsequent months.