Vaccine protection levels are generally better for people with solid cancers than for patients with cancers of the blood, the researchers report, although most people with any cancer made detectable antibodies to the coronavirus after receiving a vaccine. The trouble, Verma notes, is that COVID-19 antibody production depends on those very same B cells. Someone receiving a B cell depleting therapy who takes a COVID-19 vaccine may need to take additional measures to boost antibody production, he explains. In this study, 200 cancer patients at the Montefiore Medical Center completed a full COVID-19 vaccination serieseither with the two-dose Moderna or Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines, or the single-dose Johnson & Johnson vaccine. Almost all of the solid tumor patients (98 percent) produced antibodies to the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in sufficient abundance to be detected by the antibody test, as did a large majority (85 percent) of people with blood cancer. Twenty-two cancer patients in this study had already contracted and recovered from COVID-19 by the time they received a vaccine, and all but one of these individuals made detectable antibodies, generally at significantly higher levels than did the cancer patients who had not contacted COVID-19. Boosting antibody production
The exact antibody levels needed to provide robust protection against COVID-19 remains unknown, although researchers in the United Kingdom reported yesterday their estimates for the levels of  antibodies needed to prevent symptomatic COVID-19. Wherry, who was not involved in the study Verma was part of, notes that this lack of clarity about antibody levels needed is true for many vaccines, not just those for COVID-19. Perhaps giving a COVID-19 vaccine first and then waiting several days to administer the cancer drug would enable some antibody production to the virus. In addition to timing vaccination and therapy schedules for certain patients, other strategies for boosting antibody production could be to offer a vaccine booster shot or monoclonal antibodies to some patients.