In this study, we provide evidence that GI sources of SARS-CoV-2 viral antigenemia may instigate and drive MIS-C. We demonstrate that weeks after the initial infection, SARS-CoV-2 RNA remains in the GI tract, and zonulin-instigated hyperpermeability of the mucosal barrier coincides with SARS-CoV-2 antigenemia. To assess the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in the GI tract, we measured SARS-CoV-2 RNA from MIS-C stool samples collected several weeks after the initial SARS-CoV-2 infection or exposure. Identification of SARS-CoV-2 within the stool, coupled with the loss of competency of tight junctions seen in MIS-C, but not acute COVID-19, suggests that GI sources of SARS-CoV-2 viral components could breach the mucosal barrier and enter the circulation. Using single-molecule array (Simoa) assays (25), we detected SARS-CoV-2 spike, S1, and nucleocapsid antigens in the plasma of children with MIS-C despite being weeks past their initial SARS-CoV-2 infection or exposure. The SARS-CoV-2 spike protein was significantly elevated in patients with MIS-C compared with healthy controls (P < 0.0001) and compared with children with acute COVID-19 (P < 0.001; Figure 2D). The immunoglobulin IgM, IgG, and IgA subsets targeting SARS-CoV-2 antigens in patients with MIS-C were most highly elevated against spike and S1 proteins (Figure 3, A–C, and Supplemental Figure 4), corresponding to the antigens most highly detected in the bloodstream of these children. Here, the levels of anti–spike IgA, anti–S1 IgA, and anti–RBD IgA were all significantly increased in the patients with MIS-C (Figure 3C and Supplemental Figure 4), and anti–spike IgA remained unexpectedly elevated for months after the initial SARS-CoV-2 infection (Figure 3F). The persistence of elevated anti–SARS-CoV-2 IgA and IgM in patients with MIS-C supports the hypothesis of ongoing viral antigenic exposure and inflammation in the GI mucosal surfaces of children with MIS-C. We compared the capacity of plasma neutralization against SARS-CoV-2 between children with MIS-C and those with acute COVID-19. Interestingly, although the children with MIS-C had significantly elevated IgG antibody titers against SARS-CoV-2 relative to those with acute COVID-19, the neutralization titers were comparable between the children from both groups (Figure 3G). Ineffective neutralization and poor antigen clearance, combined with ongoing viral antigen leakage from GI sources, could partially explain the high levels of antigen detected in the children with MIS-C.
Temporal kinetics reveal that SARS-CoV-2 antigenemia is inadequately contained by humoral responses in MIS-C. Antigenemia in adults occurs early in the COVID-19 disease course and is associated with pulmonary symptoms (25), whereas in MIS-C, antigenemia is found in the setting of prominent GI symptoms weeks to months after resolution of a SARS-CoV-2 upper respiratory tract infection or asymptomatic infection. Previous reports show that in adults with acute COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2 antigens are rapidly cleared as the patient reaches seroconversion (25, 30). We detected 1020 copies of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the patient’s stool, as quantified by RT-PCR, and a plasma spike antigen level of 566 pg/mL more than 2 weeks after initiation of IVIG and steroid treatment for MIS-C. After the initiation of larazotide, his CRP level, which had quickly rebounded to 173 mg/L following withdrawal of anakinra, dropped by 85% from peak values, and spike antigen levels dropped by 90% to 59 pg/mL (Figure 5A). The data provided here represent the first evidence to our knowledge of prolonged exposure to SARS-CoV-2 in the GI tract of children with MIS-C coinciding with zonulin release, indicating a loss of mucosal barrier integrity, and SARS-CoV-2 antigenemia, which may be driving the hyperinflammatory responses defining MIS-C (Figure 6). Nucleocapsid and S1 antigens were the most prominent SARS-CoV-2 antigens detected in the blood of adults with severe COVID-19. This suggests that the intestinal leakage of the SARS-CoV-2 antigens themselves is responsible for triggering the profound cytokine release and hyperinflammatory response seen in MIS-C. As zonulin-dependent loss of gut integrity develops in MIS-C– but not COVID-19–infected children, this suggests that a chronicity of SARS-CoV-2 dysbiosis in the gut results in a cumulative increase in the breakdown of mucosal barrier integrity. These data suggest that in MIS-C, the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in the GI tract may lead to local mucosal inflammation, increased zonulin release, and a subsequent increase in gut permeability allowing SARS-CoV-2 antigens, including the superantigen-like motif of the spike protein, to traffic across mucosal barriers and into the bloodstream. SARS-CoV-2 antigen Simoa assays were prepared and performed using commercial antibodies for spike assays (Sino Biological, 40590-T62), S1 assays (Sino biological, 40150-D001), and nucleocapsid assays (Sino Biological, 40143-R004, 40143-R040), as well as a custom antibody for S1 as previously described (25). SARs-CoV-2 serological Simoa assays for IgA, IgM, and IgG against the 4 viral antigen S1, spike, nucleocapsid, and RBD were prepared and preformed using commercial antibodies for IgG assays (Bethyl Laboratories, A80-148B), IgM assays (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MII0401), and IgA assays (Abcam, ab214003) as previously described (30). Hospitalized pediatric patients were defined as having MIS-C if they met the following CDC criteria (65): fever, laboratory evidence of inflammation, evidence of more than 2 organs affected, plus evidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection (current or recent nasopharyngeal RT-PCR–positive result for SARSCoV-2 or positive SARS-CoV-2 serology) or exposure to an individual with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 within the past 4 weeks.