One new approach applied in some of these programs, is the use of mRNA coding for the required protein antigen to produce a human SARS-CoV-2 vaccine [4].CureVac has developed and established an mRNA-based technology, RNActive®, for accelerated development of human vaccines [5]. In response to the global COVID-19 pandemic, the RNActive ® technology platform has been applied to CVnCoV, an mRNA-LNP vaccine aimed at preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection [9]. The target antigen for many of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in development is the glycosylated are essential for viral binding and uptake into mammalian cells, and this is now confirmed for the SARS-CoV-2 S protein [12,13]. Inhibition of S protein cleavage into the S1 and S2 domains by protease inhibitors [14], antibodies to the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the S protein [16], or antibodies to S protein from convalescent COVID-19 patients [13] have all been protective in preclinical models, highlighting this protein as the target for vaccine development. The main secondary objectives were the evaluation of the humoral immune response measured by SARSCoV-2- S protein-specific IgG and RBD IgG (ELISA) antibodies, as well as SARS-CoV-2 virus neutralizing antibodies. Women of child-bearing potential were required to have a negative pregnancy test within three days before receiving their first vaccination, and to use an approved highly effective form of contraception from one month before the first vaccination until 3 months after the last vaccination. Vaccine
The study vaccine, CVnCoV, is an investigational LNP-formulated RNActive ® SARS-CoV-2 vaccine composed of the active pharmaceutical ingredient, an mRNA that encodes a pre-fusion conformation stabilized version of the full length spike (S) protein of SARS-CoV-2 virus, and four lipid components: cholesterol, 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC), PEG-ylated lipid and a cationic lipid. The investigator reviewed the severity gradings on the diary cards and used their clinical judgement to assess causality as either related (there is a reasonable causal relationship between the trial vaccine and the AE) or unrelated (there is no reasonable causal relationship between the trial vaccine and the AE). Briefly, plates were coated with 1µg/ml of SARS-CoV-2 Spike (Spike S1+S2 ECD-His Recombinant Protein, Cat: 40589-V08B1; Sino Biological, Chesterbrook, PA, USA) or Spike RBD (Spike RBD-His Recombinant Protein, Cat. The primary endpoints for the safety objective were the frequencies of SAEs, Grade 3 solicited AEs within 60 hours of vaccination, frequencies and severity of solicited AEs within 7 days of vaccination, and the occurrence, intensities, and causality of unsolicited AEs with 28 days of vaccination. Secondary immunogenicity endpoints are the proportions of participants seroconverting for SARS-CoV-2 S protein or RBD IgG and neutralizing antibodies, as measured by ELISA and micro-neutralization assay, respectively. Immunogenicity
Strong immune responses were observed in all vaccine groups as illustrated in Figures 3, 4 and 5 using all three assays, including in subjects who were known to be SARS-CoV-2 seropositive at baseline. In subjects Figure 3 shows the immune response as ELISA IgG antibodies against the S protein with low but variable median titers in the baseline samples (placebo group is not shown as there were no changes in median values over the 50 day period shown). When IgG antibody titers against S protein RBD were assessed (Figure 4), an evident response in the 8 μg group data (only group with a full data set in this interim analysis) was shown at Day 29 after one dose. These observations of IgG antibody responses to S protein and RBD translated into SARSCoV-2 viral neutralizing activity, as shown in Figure 5. The analysis of the ratio between binding and neutralizing antibodies (VNT to ELISA RBD and ELISA Spike) was performed for the the selected dose 12 mcg and is presented in Table 6. Th1 cytokines are important for development of T cell responses, CD4 T cell help is required for good induction of memory B cells. Since an imbalance between binding versus neutralizing antibodies could hypothetically lead to immune-mediated disease enhancement, we investigated the ratio neutralizing/binding antibodies both for the S Spike protein as for RBD in the study participants. Data in SARS-CoV-2 seropositive subjects show CVnCoV is well tolerated, supporting further use of the candidate vaccine in future clinical development and a broader population without the need for previous testing for serostatus and excluding seropositive subjects. Furthermore, the data show that good memory responses are induced by the natural infection, since even in subjects with low antibody titers at baseline, low doses of CVnCoV (either 2µg or 4µg ) were able to expand antibody titers by more than a factor 10 within one week after the first vaccination.