There are currently three accepted methods for the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection: 1) Viral RNA detection; 2) Viral protein detec­tion, typically against the nucleocapsid (N) protein or spike (S) surface glycoprotein; and 3) Measurement of specific antibodies directed to­wards viral proteins. Lateral flow immunoassays (LFIA) are a promising point-of-care (POC) solution but are associated with significant limita­tions, including qualitative readout and reportedly low sensitivity with high false positive rates (Pallett et al., 2020; Scohy et al., 2020; Wu et al.,2020). It has been previously shown that commercial glucometers can be repurposed to detect a variety of non-glucose-based targets, quanti­tatively measuring cocaine, Ebola, hepatitis B, foodborne pathogens, and interferon-gamma (Chen et al., 2020; Du et al., 2015; Guo et al.,2020; Lanet al, 2015, 2016; Taebi et al., 2018; Xiang and Lu, 2011;Zhang et al, 2019, 2020). These meters are small, inexpensive ($20–50 USD), user-friendly, highly accurate (Klon­off et al., 2018), and many connect to smartphones through Bluetooth, providing an opportunity to integrate SARS-CoV-2 detection results with contact tracing apps and electronic health records. The average SARS-CoV-2 viral load in nasal/throat, sputum, and saliva samples is 3×106, 7.50×105, and 3.5×107 copies/mL (To et al., 2020; Zou et al., 2020), respectively, necessitating signal amplification to generate product (i.e. Aiming to hit a SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic sweet-spot, we report a pointof-care saliva-based test that can measure viral antigen with a gluc­ometer. Biotin-tagged, HPLC-grade purified aptamers against SARS-CoV-2 N (Chen et al., 2020) and S (Song et al., 2020) antigen and complementary thiolated antisense DNA oligonucleotides were designed and ordered from Integrated DNA Technology (IDT). These samples were subjected to viral RNA extraction using the MagMax Viral/Pathogen Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Thermo), and the TaqPath COVID-19 multi­plex RT-qPCR assay was performed on the resulting RNA samples. SARS-CoV-2 isolate USA-WA1/2020 (BEI Resources) was propagated, and aliquots of the secreted virus in culture media were stored at − 80 ◦ C. RNA copies were quantified by digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) and ininfectious units (IU) using Vero E6 cells. The 5′ end of the aptamers and antisense strands were extended with a linker (6 and 12 thymine oligomers, respectively) to increase the distance between the aptamer and the magnetic beads, allowing the aptamer room to properly fold and reduce steric hindrance. To test the release of the antisense strand from the aptamer upon ligand binding, we designed a PCR-based assay where protein binding induces a conformation change in the aptamer, releasing the antisense oligo, as shown in Supplemental Fig. These data demonstrated specific, antigen-mediated release of the antisense oligonucleotide from the aptamer and established baseline conditions for the subsequent assay development. We then conjugated the aptamer to magnetic beads using streptavidin-biotin chemistry and optimized the magnetic bead to aptamer ratio to avoid overcrowding, which causes steric hindrance reducing antigen binding efficiency. Unsurprisingly, the SARS-CoV-2 N aptamer displayed the highest signal with the MERS nucleocapsid antigen and the S aptamer with the MERS-CoV RBD antigen, consistent with reported homology between the two coronavirus genomes. Previous studies of protein S and N directed aptamers validated binding with only recombinant purified proteins (Chen et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). S9, demonstrate the ability of both assays to correctly differentiate between infected and non-infected individuals; however, the protein S assay showed significantly higher signal-to-control than the protein N assay and was selected as the focus of the larger study. They share similar affinity and specificity to monoclonal antibodies, yet can be mass-produced at low cost, are stable at ambient temperatures for long-term storage, and can be chemically modified and engineered to produce conformational switches (Baker et al., 2006; Banerjee et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020). Saliva is the most readily obtained human specimen; however, it is also a complex and viscous sample consisting of various electrolytes, enzymes, and antibodies (Chauncey et al., 1954;Jasim et al., 2016) posing hurdles for specific and interference-free biomarker detection (Paltiel et al., 2020). Contrary to prior reports referencing better performance of antigen tests in specimens with high viral loads, we found no corre­lation (R2 < 0.2) between the Ct value obtained from PCR and the re­ported test, nor did we find any relationship between days since onset and testing or clinical symptoms. Second, there is evidence of wide variation between nucleic acid copy number and viral antigen levels (Gry et al., 2009; Taniguchi et al., 2010), which may complicate the comparison of detected antigen and nucleic acid levels.