Wearable materials with embedded synthetic biology sensors for biomolecule detection.

Synthetic biology has enabled unprecedented control of biological systems and has provided a rich palette of modular biosensors, genetic logic gates and output effectors for the design of custom biological circuits1. In parallel, recent developments in wireless technology, wearable electronics, smart materials and functional fibers with new mechanical, electrical and optical properties have led to sophisticated biosensing systems2. Although genetically encoded sensors have been readily incorporated into bench-top diagnostics, examples of wearable devices using these tools are limited. Only a few demonstrations of hygroscopically actuated vents and response to induction molecules have been achieved using living engineered bacteria encapsulated in flexible substrates and hydrogels in a wearable format3–6. This approach encounters several limitations, particularly that of sustaining living organisms in the devices for extended periods. Retaining the viability and function of wearable sensing systems based on living cells requires nutrient delivery and waste extraction, as well as temperature and gas regulation, all of which involve numerous technological hurdles. Genetically engineered cells can also pose biocontainment or biohazard concerns, particularly if integrated into consumer-level garments. Moreover, the mutational pressures on evolving cell populations can result in loss of the genetic phenotype and function. An approach that could resolve the mismatch between the practical requirements of wearable use and the operational limitations of available biomolecular circuits for sensing and response would broaden the applications of wearable materials and may enable assessment of molecular targets difficult to detect through other technologies7. Cell-free synthetic biology reactions are self-contained abiotic chemical systems with all the biomolecular components required for efficient transcription and translation. Such systems can be freeze-dried into shelf-stable formats utilizing porous substrates, which allow for robust distribution, storage and use without specialized environmental or biocontainment requirements8. Genetically engineered circuits, encoded in DNA or RNA, can be added to freeze-dried, cell-free (FDCF) reactions for activation by simple rehydration. Robust FDCF systems have already been developed for inexpensive paper-based nucleic acid diagnostics; sensitive programmable CRISPR-based nucleic acid sensors9,10; on-demand production of antimicrobials, antibodies and enzymes11; and low-cost educational kits for teaching12–14. Here we propose the use of FDCF genetic circuits in combination with specifically designed flexible and textile substrates to create practical wearable biosensors. We report on the design and validation of various wearable FDCF (wFDCF) sensors for small molecule, nucleic acid and toxin detection. The sensors are integrated into flexible multi-material substrates (for example, silicone elastomers and textiles) using genetically engineered components, including toehold switches, transcriptional factors, riboswitches, fluorescent aptamers and CRISPR–Cas12a complexes (Supplementary Fig. 1).

Results

Colorimetric wFDCF wearables. For our first wFDCF demonstration, we embedded colorimetric genetic circuits into cellulose substrates surrounded by a fluid wicking and containment assembly made of flexible elastomers. These prototypes were assembled layer-by-layer to form reaction chambers fluidically connected to top sample portals (Fig. 1a). The devices are flexible, elastic and can rapidly wick in splashed fluids through capillary action (Fig. 1b,c). Pinning geometries throughout the device direct sample fluids towards enclosed hydrophilic paper networks allowing for reaction rehydration (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig. 3b). Using an lacZ β-galactosidase operon as the circuit output to hydrolyze chlorophenol red-β-d-galactopyranoside (CPRG), a yellow-to-purple color change develops upon exposure to a target (Supplementary Figs. 2b and 3a). We considered key environmental factors in the design of these prototypes. For instance, sample exposure in the field likely occurs with variable splash volumes (as little as 50–100 μl), relative humidity (20–40%) and temperature (20–37 °C). Thus, we optimized our design to reduce inhibition of genetic circuit operation due to evaporation or excessive dilution of components. In particular, our devices use impermeable chambers exhibiting low evaporation rates(<20% volume per h), which also constrain the rehydration volume to ~50 μl per sensor. In addition, the wFDCF reactions were optimized to generate a higher concentrated reaction upon rehydration. We found that a ×1.5-concentrated cell-free reaction increased the reaction kinetics to enable signal output at least 10 min faster, ensuring that the desired circuit is completed before eventual evaporation in the device terminates the reaction (Extended Data Fig. 2). The resulting stand-alone colorimetric system is modular and can be used in garments such as bracelets (Supplementary Fig. 3c). We tested this colorimetric wearable platform using four different synthetic biology biosensors with lacZ as the output (Fig. 1d–g). These demonstrations include a constitutive lacZ expression reaction (Fig. 1d), a transcription-factor-regulated circuit using the tetracycline repressor (TetR) for the detection of anhydrotetracycline (Fig. 1e), a toehold switch for the detection of Ebola virus RNA (Fig. 1f) and a theophylline riboswitch for small-molecule sensing (Fig. 1g). The TetR sensor shows that our colorimetric platform can integrate well-established transcription-factor-based modules into a wearable format (Fig. 1e). The toehold sensor enabled detection of Ebola virus RNA at a concentration of 300 nM at 30 min compared with a control sample containing no target (unpaired t-test of independent reaction chambers; deconvoluted green channel P = 0.0074) (Fig. 1f). The riboswitch circuit was able to detect its target molecule, theophylline, at a concentration of 1 mM at 35 min compared with a control sample (unpaired t-test of independent reaction chambers; deconvoluted green channel P = 0.005) (Fig. 1g). All of the colorimetric wFDCF sensors reported here exhibited visible changes within ~40–60 min after exposure to the respective trigger molecules or inducer, and were performed at ambient conditions of 30–40% relative humidity and 30 °C to simulate the average skin surface temperature15. Fluorescent wFDCF devices with fiber optic detection for enhanced sensing. Next, we immobilized and activated FDCF sensors in wearable woven fabrics and individual threads. Figure 2 presents various demonstrations of a highly sensitive, textile-based system (Fig. 2a,b) capable of containing and monitoring the activation of wFDCF reactions with fluorescent (Fig. 2c–e, Extended Data Figs. 4–7 and Supplementary Figs. 7 and 14) or luminescent (Fig. 2f and Extended Data Fig. 3) outputs. To achieve this, we integrated: (1) hydrophilic threads (85% polyester/15% polyamide) for cell-free reagent immobilization, (2) patterns of skin-safe hydrophobic silicone elastomers for reaction containment, and (3) inter-weaved polymeric optic fibers (POFs) for signal interrogation (Fig. 2a,b, Extended Data Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 8). This fabric was chosen as our main immobilization substrate after conducting a compatibility screening of over 100 fabrics (for example, silks, cotton, rayon, linen, hemp, bamboo, wool, polyester, polyamide, nylon and combination materials) using a lyophilized constitutive lacZ cell-free reaction (Supplementary Figs. 4–6). The analysis of sensor outputs was executed using a custom-built wearable POF spectrometer (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 8) that could be monitored with a mobile phone application (Supplementary Fig. 11). Using this integrated platform, we performed distributed on-body sensing of various target exposures as shown in Fig. 2c–f. A sample activation through fluid splashing is shown in Fig. 2a, where the sample wicks through the entry ports with blackout fabrics to rehydrate the FDCF synthetic biology reactions immobilized within the hydrophilic textile fibers. These fibers are located within the excitation and emission layers of the device as shown in Fig. 2a,b. Trigger presence in the splash fluid leads to activation of the sensor circuits, which produce fluorescent or luminescent reporters.
We first verified the function of this textile platform in fluorescence mode using two independent synthetic biology modules upstream of a superfolder green fluorescent protein (sfGFP) operon. These demonstrations included the activation of constitutive sfGFP expression (Fig. 2c) and sensing of theophylline using an inducible riboswitch (Fig. 2d). A third fluorescence demonstration was done via activation of a 49-nucleotide Broccoli aptamer (Fig. 2e) with substrate specificity to (Z)-4-(3,5-difluoro-4-hydroxybenzylidene)2-methyl-1-(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)-1H-imidazol-5(4H)-one(DFHBI-1T)16. Furthermore, demonstrations utilizing luminescence outputs were conducted using a nanoluciferase (nLuc)17 operon downstream of a HIV RNA toehold switch (Fig. 2f and Extended Data Fig. 3a), as well as a Borrelia burgdorferi RNA toehold switch for the wearable detection of Lyme disease (Extended Data Fig. 3b). Additionally, we tested the operation of our platform for the detection of chemical threats such as organophosphate nerve agents used in chemical warfare and the pesticide industry. To achieve this, we modified our POF platform optics for excitation and detection at near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence, generated from a lyophilized acetylcholinesterase (AChE)-choline oxidase-HRP-coupled enzyme reaction (Fig. 2g). In the presence of acetylcholine, this reaction can produce NIR fluorescence that is readily detectable with our wearable prototype. When exposed to an organophosphate AChE inhibitor, the sensor fluorescence is reduced as compared with unexposed controls. Our wearable nerve agent sensor was validated using paraoxon-ethyl as a nerve agent simulant at levels that are four orders of magnitude lower than the reported lethal dose (LD50) by dermal absorption in mammals18.
The fluorescent wFDCF platform allows for continuous monitoring of all reaction chambers through the fiber optic network at user-defined sampling intervals for the automated detection of rehydration events and fluorescent outputs from target-activated circuits. This is achieved by illuminating the wFDCF textile reaction with blue light (447 nm) via etched excitation POFs (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 2). The light emitted from the activated system is then collected by the second set of emission POFs, which exit the fabric weave and bundle into a single trunk connected to the optical sensor of our wearable spectrometer (Extended Data Figs. 2 and 8). Signals coming from each of the devices are filtered and processed to generate temporally and spatially resolved fluorescence images of the POF bundle-ends (510 nm) and averaged pixel intensity traces per channel for quantitative analysis (Fig. 2b). In the case of luminescence demonstrations, all POF bundles are treated as signal emission sensors, without the need for sample illumination.
All reported wFDCF fluorescence and luminescence sensor replicates (n ≥ 3) exhibited visible fluorescence or luminescence within 5–20 min after exposure to relevant trigger conditions, at 30–40% relative humidity and 30 °C. CRISPR-based wFDCF sensors enable direct nucleic acid detection in wearables. Sensors based on programmable CRISPR and CRISPR-associated (Cas) enzymes9,19,20 have several advantages over other biosensors, including high sensitivity, rapid output, single base-pair resolution, freeze-drying compatibility and programmability to target any DNA or RNA sequence through interchangeable guide RNAs (gRNAs). Thus, we integrated CRISPR-based specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking (SHERLOCK) sensors into our fluorescence wFDCD platform to demonstrate this detection technique in wearable applications (Fig. 3a). We used Cas13a and Cas12a for the detection of RNA and DNA, respectively. For DNA detection, we used a Cas12a ortholog from Lachnospiraceae bacterium (LbaCas12a)19,21 that displays a nonspecific collateral cleavage activity towards single-stranded DNA(ssDNA) after detection of a gRNA-defined double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) target. This Cas12a-based sensor was paired with recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA)22 and freeze-dried into a one-pot reaction. In the presence of a target dsDNA sequence, isothermally generated RPA amplicons activate Cas12a–gRNA complexes. Then, active Cas12a engages in trans-ssDNase activity and cleaves quenched ssDNA fluorophore probes, resulting in a fluorescence output (Fig. 3a). For wearable demonstrations, we designed gRNAs against three common resistance markers in Staphylococcus aureus: the mecA gene common in methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA)23, the spa gene which encodes the protein A virulence factor24 and the ermA gene conferring macrolide resistance25. When tested in wFDCF format, the RPA-Cas12a sensors displayed detectable signals within 56–78 min (P < 0.05) with femtomolar limits of detection (Fig. 3b–d). Moreover, using our mecA wFDCF sensor (Fig. 3e and Extended Data Fig. 4), we confirmed single-digit femtomolar sensitivity (2.7 fM). Compatibility with RNA inputs and other CRISPR enzymes such as Cas13a, an ortholog from Leptotrichia wadei bacterium (LwaCas13a)9, was also confirmed (Extended Data Fig. 5), exhibiting similar in-device activation dynamics as that of cell-free reactions conducted in a plate reader. These results suggest that our wearable textile platform could be adapted to achieve sensitivities rivaling those of current laboratory diagnostic tests such as quantitative PCR (qPCR) for monitoring contamination or spread of bacteria and viruses. To further demonstrate the modularity of our CRISPR–Cas12a wearable sensors, we tested wFDCF devices containing three orthogonal Cas12a–gRNA complexes in isolated reaction wells (Fig. 3f). In this experiment, each device was splashed with dd-H2O containing different targets, each specific to only one Cas12a–gRNA complex. The orthogonal behavior of our CRISPR-based wearable sensors is shown in Fig. 3g,h, where higher fluorescence was observed for the cases in which the dsDNA trigger matched the predefined Cas12a–gRNA complex at each sensor location.

With the goal of real-time monitoring of environmental exposure and biohazard detection, we designed a jacket containing a distributed arrangement of wFDCF multi-sensor arrays (Fig. 3i). The various optical fibers carrying the output emission signals from different sensors can be routed into a single bundle for centralized imaging analysis, which we demonstrate using a wFDCF CRISPR–Cas12a-based MRSA-sensing array, containing spa, ermA and mecA sensors, that was activated in the wearable prototype with a fluid splash containing 100 fM of spa DNA trigger (Extended Data Fig. 6). Only the well containing the spa sensor generated a fluorescent signal upon activation. The platform is also compatible with transcription-only outputs, such as rehydrated fluorescent aptamer reactions (Supplementary Fig. 9), where the fluorescence signal is monitored by microscopy over time. In addition, the optical sensor allows for facile fluorescent output multiplexing simply by using fluorescent proteins with orthogonal emission profiles (Extended Data Fig. 7). In this example, wFDCF reactions for three constitutively expressed fluorescent output proteins (eforRed26, dTomato27 and sfGFP28) were used to detect distinguishable output signals in a single bundle. We also show that the wFDCF POF system is fully compatible with integrated lyophilized lysis components, allowing for the release and detection of a plasmid-borne mecA gene when challenged with intact bacterial cells (Supplementary Fig. 10). Finally, to develop a complete data feedback cycle between the platform and the user, we integrated the detector system with a custom wireless mobile application that enables continuous cloud-based data logging, signal processing, geolocation tracking and on-the-fly control of various detector components through a smartphone or other networked digital device (Fig. 3j). All images and spectral data presented in Figs. 2 and 3 were collected and processed using wFDCF devices fully integrated with our wearable spectrometer and mobile phone application. Further details on the hardware and software design, as well as implementation of an Opuntia microdasys bioinspired fluid collection29 add-on for improved sample harvesting and routing splashes outside of the sensor zones into the wFDCF modules, can be found in Extended Data Fig. 8 and Supplementary Figs. 11 and 12.

A face-mask-integrated sensor for SARS-CoV-2 detection in exhaled aerosols. Finally, we explored whether our wFDCF system could be adapted to create face masks capable of detecting SARS-CoV-2, as a complementary approach to diagnosis based on nasopharyngeal sampling. Respiratory droplets and aerosols are the transmission routes for respiratory infectious diseases but have been underutilized historically for diagnosis. Work on breath-based sensing has focused on the detection of volatile organic compound biomarkers in infected patients using electrochemical sensors30,31 or downstream mass spectrometry analysis32, which may be challenging to implement on a wide scale. The National Institutes of Health Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics Initiative has identified SARS-CoV-2 detection from breath sampling technologies as an active area of interest for alleviating testing bottlenecks33. The virus accumulates on the inside of masks as a result of coughing, talking or normal respiration34–36. We designed a face-mask sensor containing four modular components: a reservoir for hydration, a large surface area collection sample pad, a wax-patterned µPAD (microfluidic paper-based analytical device) and a lateral flow assay (LFA) strip (Fig. 4a,b). Each module can be oriented on the outside or inside of the face mask, with the exception of the collection pad, which must be positioned on the mask interior facing the mouth and nose of the patient. Capillary action wicks any collected fluid and viral particles from the sample collection pad to the µPAD, which contains an arrangement of freeze-dried lysis and detection components (Fig. 4c). The use of the µPAD format allowed us to rapidly prototype and optimize a passively regulated multi-step reaction process. Each reaction zone is separated by polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) time delays that enable tunable incubation times between each reaction, greatly improving the efficiency of the sensor compared with that of a one-pot lyophilized reaction (Supplementary Fig. 13). The first µPAD reaction zone contains lyophilized lysis reagents including components known to lyse viral membranes37–39. The second µPAD reaction zone is a reverse transcription–recombinase polymerase amplification (RT-RPA) reaction zone containing a customized isothermal amplification reaction developed to target a nonoverlapping region of the SARS-CoV-2 S gene. The final µPAD reaction zone contains a Cas12a SHERLOCK sensor with an optimized gRNA for detection of the amplified dsDNA amplicon. In the presence of SARS-CoV-2-derived amplicons, the activated Cas12a enables trans-cleavage of a co-lyophilized 6-FAM(TTATTATT)-Biotin ssDNA probe. To enable a simple colorimetric visual readout, an integrated LFA strip is used to detect probe cleavage. The output strip orientation is adjustable to preserve patient confidentiality. Details on the design, performance and rele­vant molecular sensor sequences are presented in Supplementary Figs. 14 and 15.
From activation of the face-mask sensor to a final readout only takes ~1.5 h. The limit of detection observed for our sensors is 500 copies (17 aM) of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro transcribed (IVT) RNA, which matches that of World Health Organization-endorsed standard laboratory-based RT–PCR assays40 (Fig. 4d,e). The sensors also do not cross-react to RNA from other commonly circulating human coronavirus strains (HCoVs) (Fig. 4f,g). Notably, our hands-off diagnostic reaction proceeds to full completion even at room temperature, which is considered suboptimal for RT, RPA and Cas12a activities. We also validated the SARS-CoV-2 face-mask sensor using a precision lung simulator attached to a high-fidelity human airway model (Fig. 4h and Supplementary Fig. 16). The target RNA was nebulized to replicate lung emissions with aerosol diameters matching those naturally occurring in breath exhalation plumes. The breath temperature was regulated to 35 °C and the relative humidity in the mask microclimate was measured to be 100% relative humidity. Under these realistic simulation conditions, the face-mask sensor was able to detect a contrived SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA (vRNA) fragment after a breath sample collection period of 30 min, with a calculated accumulation of 106–107 vRNA copies on the sample pad, as determined by qPCR with reverse transcription (RT–qPCR) (Fig. 4i,j). Clinical measurements have previously shown that the SARS-CoV-2 breath emission rate of infected patients could reach an output 103–105 copies per min (ref. 35).
Unlike other current nucleic acid tests that require laboratory equipment and trained technicians41–45, our SARS-CoV-2 face-mask sensor requires no power source, operates autonomously without liquid handling, is shelf-stable, functions at near-ambient temperatures, provides a visual output in under 2 h and is only ~3 g in weight. All the user has to do is press a button to activate a reservoir containing nuclease-free water. To our knowledge, no other SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid test achieves high sensitivity and specificity while operating fully at ambient temperatures, allowing integration into a wearable format. We believe our SARS-CoV-2 mask could combine protection and sensing into one system and could be adapted to discriminate between SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viruses, as well as different emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants46,47.

Discussion

We view the wFDCF platform as being complementary to cell-based synthetic biology sensors. We have shown that it enables wearable biosensors that are shelf-stable, genetically programmable and highly sensitive. However, the current wFDCF technology does have a number of limitations, including the single-use nature of the sensors and inability to operate in particular environmental conditions, such as high humidity or underwater. These challenges are also shared by other sensors in which operation requires open access to the environment and will require further engineering to surmount. Our wFDCF sensors are responsive to external rehydration events, such as splashes with contaminated fluids, and withstand inhibitory evaporative and dilutive effects in open-environment conditions (30–40% relative humidity and ~25–30 °C). Alternatively, user-generated samples such as breath emissions can be used if an on-demand hydration system is employed, as we demonstrate for the SARS-CoV-2-sensing face mask. We showed that these freeze-dried systems generate measurable colorimetric, fluorescence or luminescence outputs upon exposure to relevant real-world targets such as MRSA, Ebola virus or SARS-CoV-2 virus. In the wFDCF POF sensors, continuous monitoring enables rapid alert to an exposure event. We also demonstrated the integration of our device designs into garments that are compatible with wireless sensor networks to provide real-time dynamic monitoring of exposure using custom smartphone applications. Although laboratory testing may be more sensitive, our wFDCF sensors have the advantages of a wearable format, autonomous functioning and rapid results. To our knowledge, no previous wearable technology has detected viral or bacterial nucleic acid signatures in fluid samples with sensitivities rivaling those of traditional laboratory tests at ambient temperatures. Compared with point-of-care diagnostics, which similarly attempt to eliminate time-consuming and resource-intensive laboratory tests, our sensors do not require the manual application of a swabbed or directly applied sample to provide a readout. They accomplish field sensing on the surface of the user or on surfaces exposed to patient samples, such as the inside of a face mask. Moreover, in contrast to batch-mode point-of-care sensors, they can be networked to provide spatial sensing arrays of lyophilized reactions and lightweight polymer fabrics, thus cloaking the user and continuously generating high-density, real-time outputs without sacrificing comfort or agility in the field. They are designed to operate autonomously and do not require training for use or multiple operations by the user to acquire results, which removes the need to perform regular exposure checks. In contrast to wearable sensors that primarily employ electronic devices to monitor physiological signals such as heart rate or blood oxygen levels, our sensors detect environmental threats or pathogens through nucleic acids, proteins or small molecules. Although electrochemical sensors have been integrated into a wearable format31,48, they only detect chemicals, and an easily programmable wearable form for sensitive nucleic acid detection does not currently exist. Integration of our wearable synthetic biology reactions with these advances in electrochemical devices could be a fertile area for expanding the functionality of wearable sensors31,49. We have also shown that the sensors can be highly modular and adapted to various form factors, such as clothing or face masks. The key functional differences of our platform over current related technologies, including traditional bench-top assays, are summarized in Supplementary Table 4. Potential field applications for our wFDCF sensors include warfighters and first responders operating in environments where a specific chemical or biological threat is suspected, and clinicians, health workers and researchers working in high-risk areas. For example, wFDCF-enabled coats and gowns in hospitals could provide alerts to prevent the spread of nosocomial infections. An additional promising application is patient-worn, sensor-enabled personal protective equipment, such as the SARS-CoV-2 face mask.